Then of course, there's usability, right?
How easy is this thing to use?
Is it easy to learn?
Is it quick to complete tasks?
The common tasks that we most want to do?
Is it quick and easy to do that?
Is it forgiving of mistakes?
This is one that's often overlooked,
right?
And then what happens is, you see,
designers, I love designers.
I'm a designer, right?
But let's make a sweeping generalization
about designers now that is absolutely not
true, but there is a grain of truth in it.
And that sweeping generalization
is we are big picture people.
We think holistically about systems,
right?
We are terrible at thinking about
edge cases where things go wrong.
And so what happens?
The developers in the room have to code
up all of these error messages and
if this goes wrong then and
they write error messages.
And I'm sorry, no offense,
you're rubbish at it.
Right, 404 error.
Whoa, what's that, right?
Or they try and be funny.
The page you're looking for
cannot be found, or.
All these kinds of rubbish kind
of star wars references, and
this is not the page you're looking for
and, no, terrible, but
it's because we as designers
haven't done our job of
actually looking at how we're
gonna deal with these things.
Accessibility is another big part
of what we do as product designers.
There's user accessibility,
does it meet the needs of the user?
For example,
a user that's got special needs,
whether those needs are permanent,
situational, or temporary.
And I don't know whether you're aware of
this distinction between accessibility and
inclusive design.
But I tend to talk about
inclusive design a lot more than
accessibility because when you talk about,
if you say for
example, we've got to make our website so
it can be used for
people that are blind, right?
Or have got vision problems.
Then the company owner goes, well,
we don't have employees that
have got visual disability, so
we don't need to worry about that.
And it gets written off, right?
And nobody does it.
But what if you say, okay,
we need to make our web app accessible for
anybody over 50.
Yeah, we got people like that.
Also people that have got vision problems,
right?
Or what about people may be
that get eye fatigue a lot.
So that's what I mean by inclusive design.
There are people with permanent
disabilities, may be for example,
they're an amputee, right?
Or they might have
a situational disability.
They're holding a toddler, so
they haven't got used to that arm, or
they might have a temporary
disability they've broken their arm.
Effectively, they're all suffering from
the same problem [LAUGH] which is they
can't use this arm, right?
So it's really important that we
think about these things as we're
building apps because it's not just
about the guy with the amputated arm,
it's also the person
holding their toddler.
It was a bit waffly, apologies for that.
And then there's device accessibility,
which we've talked about before,
where you need to think about the size,
the platform, the input method,
the operating system, all of these
things that are relevant to the device.
There's a lot of accessibility
needs that we need to consider.
And then interactivity, especially,
this is where product, we really kind
of focus in on product design and
some of the things that web apps have that
maybe a traditional website doesn't, and
we need to be giving careful consideration
to a whole range of interactions.
Sliders, drag and drop, tag management,
QR codes, modules, draws, tool tips.
There's loads of this kind of stuff,
all of which you need to be considered.
I know I'm beginning,
this is just a long list of things that
are probably overwhelming you, but
it's showing the breadth and the depth
of what product design is all about.
Security, logins, account management,
communications, right?
How do we reassure users that their
security and privacy are under control.
How do we give them a sense of control
over those kinds of things, right?
That's another aspect that we
need to be thinking about.
How much time do we as
designers spend thinking about,
logins, probably very little.
But yeah,
it's fundamental to the experience.
And it's a great example of the thing
that we're doing again and again and
again and again.
So that's one of those things that
can really begin to annoy you.
Like those pointless check boxes, right?
You know the ones?
Username, password, remember me,
does it ever remember you?
Have you ever been to a site where it
actually remembers you next time you come?
Why are those checkboxes there?
[LAUGH] I don't get them.
It's ridiculous.
Anyway, that's, again, off the point.
And then, of course,
there's all the branding stuff as well.
We need to ensure that our branding
is consistent across our web apps.
We need to make them recognizable and
memorable and
we need to make an emotional connection,
right?
So it's like,
Mailchimp was a great example of this,
of a user interface that was
incredibly compelling because
it had character,
it had fun to it, it was engaging.
And yet over the years,
it's become more and
more corporate, and
it's lost a lot of that character.
Now, I'm not necessarily
saying that's wrong, right?
It may be that they've made a conscious
move towards the corporate market,
but we as product designers need
to be worrying about this stuff.
You've reached the end of the list, right?
The list of things that you've got to
think about as a product designer.
Wow, that was quite an overwhelming
list and I'm sorry about that.
But I wanted you to see the nuances and
the complexity of this,
that it is so much more than
creating an interface in Figma and
that there's deeper
considerations going on here.
The product designer is
as much about shaping
the product as the interface, right?
Do you see what I'm getting at there?
That a UI's design job is
they've given functionality and
they create the user interface.
A product designer is
shaping the whole product,
everything from the branding to
the functionality, to the interface,
to the experience as a whole,
it's all part of one big picture.